Initiate Comprehensive Kuksa Requirements Analysis for Enhanced Version Development (#21)
eclipse-kuksa/kuksa-databroker: doc/kuksa_requirementes.md

Reviewer: Change name of file, remove last `e`

  - [Performance / runtime footprint](#performance--runtime-footprint)
  - [Provider control and provider capabilities](#provider-control-and-provider-capabilities)
  - [Control the rate of updates](#control-the-rate-of-updates)
  - [Differentiate between different providers of the same VSS data](#differentiate-between-different-providers-of-the-same-vss-data)
  - [Data Aliveness/Availability](#data-alivenessavailability)
  - [Missing features from `sdv.databroker.v1` in `kuksa.val.v1`](#missing-features-from-sdvdatabrokerv1-in-kuksavalv1)
- [Exploring a design of a bidirectional streaming API](#exploring-a-design-of-a-bidirectional-streaming-api)
    - [Design choices](#design-choices)
        - [Stream](#stream)
        - [Bidirectional stream](#bidirectional-stream)
        - [Actuators](#actuators)
    - [Overview](#overview)
  - [COVESA topics](#covesa-topics)
- [Appendix](#appendix)
  - [1. Use Cases](#1-use-cases)
  - [2. Protobuf API Diagram](#2-protobuf-api-diagram)

# Documentation
  ### [Terminology](./terminology.md)
  ### [System Architecture](./system-architecture.md)

# Domain requirements
## Interface requirements

> ### Current Databroker API design

Author: I will move it to the Appendix section.

}

``` 

### New Databroker API proposal
**Change History**:
* Added:
  * service method -> **`rpc Update(stream SetRequest) returns (SetResponse);`**
  * service method -> **`rpc Actuate(ActuateRequest) returns (ActuateResponse);`**
  * service method -> **`rpc GetMetadata(MetadataRequest) returns (MetadataResponse);`**
  * message -> **`ActuateRequest`**
  * message -> **`ActuateResponse`**
  * message -> **`MetadataRequest`**
  * message -> **`MetadataResponse`**
  
* Removed:
  * field -> **`repeated DataEntryError errors`** from **`GetResponse`**
  * fielf -> **`repeated DataEntryError errors`** from **`SetResponse`**

```protobuf
service VAL {
  rpc Get(GetRequest) returns (GetResponse);

  rpc Set(SetRequest) returns (SetResponse);

  rpc Update(stream SetRequest) returns (SetResponse);

  rpc Subscribe(SubscribeRequest) returns (stream SubscribeResponse);

  rpc Actuate(ActuateRequest) returns (ActuateResponse);

  rpc GetMetadata(MetadataRequest) returns (MetadataResponse);

  rpc GetServerInfo(GetServerInfoRequest) returns (GetServerInfoResponse);
}

message EntryRequest {
  string path                     = 1;
  View view                       = 2;

>   repeated Field fields           = 3;

Author: True

}

message GetRequest {
  repeated EntryRequest entries   = 1;
}

message GetResponse {
  repeated DataEntry entries      = 1;
  Error error                     = 1;
}

message EntryUpdate {
  DataEntry entry                 = 1;
  repeated Field fields           = 2;
}

message SetRequest {
  repeated EntryUpdate updates    = 1;
}

message SetResponse {
  Error error                     = 1;
}

message SubscribeEntry {
  string path                     = 1;
  View view                       = 2;
  repeated Field fields           = 3;
}

message SubscribeRequest {
  repeated SubscribeEntry entries = 1;
}

message SubscribeResponse {
  repeated EntryUpdate updates    = 1;
}

message ActuateRequest {
  EntryUpdate actuator = 1;
}

message ActuateResponse {
  Error error                     = 1;
}

message MetadataRequest {
  repeated string path            = 1;
}

message MetadataResponse {
  repeated DataEntry metadata     = 1;
}

message GetServerInfoRequest {
  // Nothing yet
}

message GetServerInfoResponse {
  string name                     = 1;
  string version                  = 2;
}
``` 

# Functional requirements

> ### As Client

Author: Suggestion committed.

1. As a client I want to have a single service point accessible from my execution environment.
   
2. As a client I want to `Get` sensor values or actuator current values of the vehicle and its environment in a uniform manner.
  - Details:
    * All sensor and actuator values for which a client have permission to.

>     * Client must provide the path, paths or wildcard.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * Client must provide the paths of the requested signals, which optionally may contain wildcards.
```

Author: Suggestion commited.

    * I want to receive exactly all the signals’ values I requested without errors.
  
3. As a client I want to `Subscribe` to sensor values or actuator current values when some signal value changed -> what about continuous subscription?
  - Details:
    * All sensor and actuator values for which a client have permission to.
    * Client must provide the path, paths or wildcard paths.
    * I want to receive exactly all the signals’ values I requested without errors.

4. As a client I want to `Subscribe` and be able to apply a filter to receive a sensor value with an interval of x milliseconds only if the value has changed.

>    

Reviewer 2: Not sure where to place that:
n. A signal can have value out of the set of the defined value restriction/data type but it can also have those additional failure states:
    - "unknown": The signal with the specified path/name is not defined on the system.
    - "access denied": The signal is basically known, but the consumer/provider has no permission to access it.
    - "not provided": The signal is basically known, but currently no provider is serving it or the provider lost the connection to the backend component serving this signal.
    - "invalid": The signal is being served by a provider, but currently has no valid value. This may happen if a specific value cannot be determined because of some (temporary) physical sensor error or a target value is currently not known, e.g. if a window is moved by a passenger via up/down button.

The failure states "unknown" and "access denied" are real error situations, that shall be avoided by a proper system configuration. Nevertheless, they may occur in case of clients requesting "optional signals" and also if users of the system enter some private mode and some signals accessible before may get inaccessible.

The states "not provided" and "invalid" are regular states that may occur during normal operation of the running system and must be properly handled by clients.

Reviewer: Do we need or want to be more clear on how this interval requirement should be interpreted and implemented? 
I can see some different implementations that give partially different behavior

- Poll every x millisecond but send only if value is different compared to the last value sent to client
- Whenever databroker receives a changed value (compared to last value in databroker) check if x millisconds has passed, if so send value to client
- Whenever Databroker receives a value and x milliseconds has passed, compare with previous value sent to client and if changed send to client

Do we want alreayd in requirements to state if implementation shall use a poll-based or event-based mechanism, or do we leave that to the implementation?

Reviewer 3: Answering to the comment by @erikbosch 

Is the requirement `with an interval of x miliseconds` a new requirement (feature request)? I was not aware that the current version of the databroker supports this. 

Intuitively, to me subscribe still has the semantic of only getting informed about changed values. Because of that,  I would go for the third option to check what has been sent to the client before and potentially adding "grace period" before after the last value has been sent before sending another value.

But I get that there are uses cases as well where the client is interested in the value at a fixed frequency to essentially downsample the data stream coming from the sensor.

5.  As a client I want to `GetMetadata` static Metadata from signals.
  - Details:
    * All sensors, actuators, and attributes values for which a client have permission to.
    * Client must provide the path, paths or wildcard.

6.  As a client I want to `Get` attributes values once.

7.  As a client I want to `Actuate` a target value of an actuator and guarantee that the operation succeeded.

8.  As a client I want to connect and interact with Databroker either if it contains data or not.

9.  As a client I want to connect and interact with Databroker either if it contains data or not.

> 

Author: Suggestion committed.

10.  As a client I want to know if there is a provider up and running by getting some sensor or actuator value.

11.  As a client I don’t want to `Subscribe` to target values.

> 12.  As a client I don’t want to `Subscribe` to attributes values.

Reviewer 2: Not yet fully sure about that: What about updating individual components on a running system (without restarting "everything")? In that case certain attributes may change and clients need being notified about that.

Reviewer 3: I am not sure either whether we need this explicit exclusion. However, the VSS documentation (https://covesa.github.io/vehicle_signal_specification/rule_set/data_entry/attributes/) states: 

`Attribute values can also change, similar to sensor values. The latter can be useful for attribute values that are likely to change during the lifetime of the vehicle. However, attribute values should typically not change more than once per ignition cycle, or else it should be defined as a sensor instead.`

This definition would match with the assumption that attributes (should) do not change during an ignition cycle. But do clients "survive" an ignition cycle?

# KUKSA requirements

# Content
- [KUKSA requirements](#kuksa-requirements)
- [Content](#content)
- [Documentation](#documentation)
    - [Terminology](#terminology)
    - [System Architecture](#system-architecture)
- [Functional requirements](#functional-requirements)
    - [As Client](#as-client)
    - [As Databroker](#as-databroker)
    - [As Provider](#as-provider)
- [Non-Functional Requirements](#non-functional-requirements)
  - [Data availability/persistence according to lifecycle of Client, Databroker and Provider](#data-availabilitypersistence-according-to-lifecycle-of-client-databroker-and-provider)
  - [Wildcard support](#wildcard-support)
  - [Registration of Datapoints](#registration-of-datapoints)
  - [Availability of Datapoints](#availability-of-datapoints)
  - [Lifecycle of components](#lifecycle-of-components)
  - [Path requests](#path-requests)
  - [Errors](#errors)
  - [Setting Values](#setting-values)
  - [Atomic operatoins](#atomic-operatoins)
  - [Update notifications](#update-notifications)
  - [Access rights](#access-rights)

>   - [VSS signals - Users vs providers](#vss-signals---users-vs-providers)

Reviewer 3: To me the whole document more reads like a mix between requirements, design considerations, design decisions and and API definition. Maybe it becomes more accessible and when we split the document into different documents which can be discussed separately. Otherwise, I think it will be very different and lengthy to achieve consensus on the whole PR. 

After a first read, this the part before the discussion of the `VSS signals - Users vs providers` could be in another document than what follows afterwards.

Reviewer 2: My idea was/is to have a document containing both design considerations together with the resulting requirements. The requirements could be tagged, so that they can be filtered from the rest later.

Reviewer 3: I See, and linking the design considerations and the requirements sounds good. Given the overall length of the document, I would still opt to keep it on multiple pages and use cross-references. 
In the long run, I would hope that the documents that we get out of this process can be the foundation for creating something like a Kuksa API specification in a similar style as other specs like VISSv2 (https://github.com/COVESA/vehicle-information-service-specification) 

Maybe more of a philosophical question, but should the requirements be more the result of the use cases and user expectations, and then the design considerations be the answer on how to address the requirements?

Reviewer 2: That's a thing which I can still not fully grab in my head. I was thinking about having a few "basic requirements" what consumers (and providers) can expect from the broker. I.e. things like "I want to pull/get the current state of vehicle signals via a single service interface (in an efficient way)". This does not yet describe certain details. 

Based on that set of requirements some "design considerations" need to be discussed and decided, resulting in a more detailed "next level" set of requirements addressed to towards the API design and broker implementation.

  - [Control the rate of updates](#control-the-rate-of-updates)
  - [Differentiate between different providers of the same VSS data](#differentiate-between-different-providers-of-the-same-vss-data)
  - [Data Aliveness/Availability](#data-alivenessavailability)
  - [Missing features from `sdv.databroker.v1` in `kuksa.val.v1`](#missing-features-from-sdvdatabrokerv1-in-kuksavalv1)
- [Exploring a design of a bidirectional streaming API](#exploring-a-design-of-a-bidirectional-streaming-api)
    - [Design choices](#design-choices)
        - [Stream](#stream)
        - [Bidirectional stream](#bidirectional-stream)
        - [Actuators](#actuators)
    - [Overview](#overview)
  - [COVESA topics](#covesa-topics)
- [Domain requirements](#domain-requirements)
  - [Interface requirements](#interface-requirements)
    - [Current Databroker API design](#current-databroker-api-design)
    - [New Databroker API proposal](#new-databroker-api-proposal)
- [Appendix](#appendix)
  - [1. Use Cases](#1-use-cases)
  - [2. Protobuf API Diagram](#2-protobuf-api-diagram)

# Documentation
  ### [Terminology](./terminology.md)
  ### [System Architecture](./system-architecture.md)

# Functional requirements

> ### As Signal Consumer

Reviewer 3: I get a bit confused with the usage of the term `signal consumer` and `client`. 

The Terminology defines that a client is either a consumer or a provider. The headline seems to limit the scope to clients which are consumers. However, the following statements start with `a client` and not with `a signal consumer` is this by intention? Looking at the subsequent paragraph for providers, my feeling is that it should rather be changed to `a signal consumer`.

Author: I will modify the requirements for support `signal consumer` terminology.

> 1. As a client I want to have a single service point accessible from my execution environment.

Reviewer 2: @lukasmittag: I did not explicitly wanted to exclude that. The "single service point" was more intended to say that I want to have a "central" (maybe backed up) instance providing access to "all" the signals - instead of having multiple service providing specific signals each (e.g. seat service providing all the seat related signals, wiper service, etc).

> 1. As a client I want to have a single service point accessible from my execution environment.

Reviewer 3: Do you mean "single service endpoint" here? Just after reading your comments I understand that "single service point" here is not a datapoint in the databroker (which still left the question what a service point is compared to a regular datapoint :|)

> 2. As a client I want to `Get` sensor values or actuator current values of the vehicle and its environment in a uniform manner.

Reviewer 3: how about `of the vehicle signals` instead of `vehicle and its environment` because I am not sure how to re-define vehicle and its environment when we already have definition for signal.

Reviewer 2: In my initial document this was part of a "basic requirement". Signals of the vehicle's environment would be outside air temperature, for example

Reviewer 3: Then I interpreted the `environment` too wide. I was more thinking about the information about traffic lights, charging infrastructure, attached trailers etc.

  - Details:

>     * All sensor and actuator values for which a client has permission to.

Reviewer 3: `actuator current`

The formulation was a bit misleading for me at first. How about `client can only get values for signals to which it has permission to`
I first thought, that a single `Get` should return all available values which I guess is not the intention.

Author: Thanks for the suggestion, will use it.

>     * Client must provide the paths of the requested signals, which optionally may contain wildcards.

Reviewer 3: Do we really want to allow wildcards for `Get`? This is discussed below too. To my understanding potentially processing wildcards in the Get function may add processing overhead/latency to the commonly used `Get` endpoint. 
Because of that I would only allow wildcards in the `GetMetadata` which is not called that often and has less performance requirements. A typically flow could be to call `GetMetadata` once and then use the result in `Get`.

Reviewer: Does it necessarily need to add that much overhead?, I mean if you first make a lookup on exact match, and only do wildcard/regxp matching if that fails.

Reviewer 3: Good point, that might work. I was more thinking from the perspective of performance and promising maximum processing delays in the future (when running on specific hardware). For these cases, we would then clearly need to communicate that the performance varies depending on whether wildcards are used or not.

>     * I want to receive exactly all the signals’ values I requested without errors.

Reviewer 3: Can we clarify this to something like: 
`I want to receive exactly all the signal values I requested or an error if retrieving at least on the requested signals fails` 
(not sure whether this is the current behavior)

Reviewer 2: I don't think, that a consumer should rely on all the requested signals can be received without "errors". I wrote about states of signal (values) above. Some state might represent error situations, some just might be temporary lacking a valid value. I do **not** believe, that we can release consumers from handling those kind of situations (maybe there are some very simple consumers/app, where this would be possible. But more mature consumers will need - and want - to handle that failures.) 
Furthermore, if requesting multiple signals in one request. The failures shall be reported per signal separately.

Author: I think we aligned on that some time ago and understood that the decision was to return only a grpc error with detailed information on failed signals when dealing with a singles request to multiple signals as specified here (https://github.com/SoftwareDefinedVehicle/kuksa-databroker/blob/docs/kuksa_databroker_api/doc/kuksa_requirementes.md#errors).
So for me the requirement would be as you said @erikbosch:
`I want to receive exactly all the signal values I requested or an error if retrieving at least on the requested signals fails`

> 3. As a client I want to `Subscribe` to sensor values or actuator current values when some signal value changed -> what about continuous subscription?

Reviewer: I think we need to separate between at least three use-cases:

- Databroker has not received a new datapoint at all (from CAN, SOME/IP, ...)
- Databroker has received a new Datapoint (with new timestamp), but value is the same
- Databroker has received a new Datapoint (with new timestamp and value)

A typical use could be tire pressure monitoring, you may be interested in getting every observation even if value stays the same, as lack of observations might indicate a problem with the system.

Reviewer 3: In addition to what @erikbosch writes, I would add to the sentence at least something like `to sensor values or actuator current values AND GET THEN NOTIFIED when some signal value changed`.

Reviewer 3: For me there is also room for interpretation whether a client can subscribe to multiple signals and is then notified  with all signals when one signal changes or only with the changed signals. 

For instance, the client subscribes with a single call to A, B, and C. After B changes, does the client get only B or also A and C where the values remain the same. My intuition would say only B, but just reading the requirement both seems possible to me.

  - Details:
    * All sensor and actuator values for which a client has permission to.
    * Client must provide the path, paths or wildcard paths.
    * I want to receive exactly all the signals’ values I requested without errors.

4. As a client I want to `Subscribe` and be able to apply a filter to receive a sensor value with an interval of x milliseconds only if the value has changed.
   
5.  As a client I want to `GetMetadata` static Metadata from signals.
  - Details:
    * All sensors, actuators, and attributes values for which a client has permission to.
    * Client must provide the path, paths or wildcard.

> 6.  As a client I want to `Get` attributes values once.

Reviewer 3: Why the `once`?

> 7.  As a client I want to `Actuate` a target value of an actuator. This value has to be forwarded to the provider of this actuator if the provider is available, otherwise the target value is lost. 

Reviewer 3: Just to be sure, this is a massive change to the current behavior, right? My expectation in the current databroker would have been that the target value simply stays in the databroker no matter whether someone consumed the data or not. 

Now, it seems that you only want to forward target values if there is already someone subscribed to this value who can perform the actuation (aka actuation provider). This requires a 1:1 connection between the target of a signal and an already subscribed provider. 

I am a bit afraid that we limit ourselves too much here. For instance, how about cases where a third-party is interested in what actuation if currently going on (or failed)? I could also think about cases, where the target value is still valid even there was no provider in the moment it was set. Here the provider could check the timestamp and decide for itself whether the actuation shall be performed or not.

Reviewer 2: I was discussing with Rafael and John about specifying a lifetime of a value (also for sensor and current actuator values). This could be also used for target values: If the provider is not "picking" a target value up within its lifetime, it is dropped. That means, that a short "outage" of a provider does not lead automatically to a lost actuation request, but target values set "some hours" before also don't lead to no longer expect actuation. 

John's counter-arg was that the info about temporary missing provider would be given back to the client (via signal specific failure) and then it would be the clients task to retry once the provider "is back" (and the actuation still is wanted).

Reviewer 2: Forgot to state, that I think John's point is valid. The "pretended convenience" of storing the target value in the broker for a certain time is a false one: The consumer must be able to handle outages of the broker itself, anyway. Therefore, it's best to implement the retry on consumer side. This could be a convenience functionality offered by the consumer SDK/library.

Reviewer 3: The "pretended convenience" is a good point. 
It still means that the consumer who wants to trigger the actuation needs to find the moment in time when the actuation provider is connected. 
With defining a lifetime of how long the actuation target is valid when setting the target value, one could ease this is a bit. But I am not sure whether we will see many useful actuation provider which really come and leave that frequently so that this becomes relevant.

Would this mean that the databroker only brokers sensor values and for actuation more acts as a router and translator?

Reviewer 4: > Would this mean that the databroker only brokers sensor values and for actuation more acts as a router and translator?

Yes. Or put another way:
- Signal values (data) are cached.
- Actuation requests (requests, possibly expecting a response) are not cached.

Even if we decide that actuation requests should not return a response, it is very hard / impossible to formulate a consistent cache invalidation policy for actuation requests if we were to model them as "setting a field in a database", i.e. "target values".

It does not play well with actuators that can be controlled not only through databroker - from other ECUS over CAN or directly connected physical buttons - which I expect would be a pretty standard situation. When that happens, the target value is outdated and pretty much useless.

At the time of writing, I don't know a single provider implementation that checks the timestamp of a target value or at any point "clears" them. Neither are any consumers that I'm aware of. They essentially live forever. I think it's a lot easier to write robust providers (and consumers) by modelling actuation as a request / response thing.

> 8.  As a client I want to connect and interact with Databroker either if it contains data or not.

Reviewer 3: What the reason for the `either if it contains data or not`. Are there other cases that I am missing which are implicitly excluded by the requirement?

10.  As a client I want to know if there is a provider up and running by getting some sensor or actuator value.

> 11.  As a client I don’t want to `Subscribe` to target values.

Reviewer: From a testing perspective would it not be better to state:

"As a client I shall not have the possibility to subscribe to target values"

(if we want that). Then testers can verify that it is not possible. Maybe use "shall"/"shall not" rather than "want"/"don't want" in document

Author: I will rephrase all the requirements to support this naming.

12.  As a client I don’t want to `Subscribe` to attributes values.

13.  As a client I don’t want to `Get` target values.

14.  As a client I don’t want to `Set` sensor values.

15.  As a client I don’t want to `Set` attributes values.

### As Databroker
1. The data broker shall be able to handle catalogs of signals described by the syntax as defined by the COVESA Vehicle Signal Specification (VSS). This relates to all aspects of the VSS syntax definition, which is also called VSS rule set. This implies that the data broker can handle the signal catalog as defined by the COVESA VSS.

2. Databroker shall support at least those metadata elements as defined by the VSS rule set.

### As Provider
1. As a provider I want to `Set` the value and current value of one or many sensors and/or actuators with its timestamp to Databroker.
2. 

> 3. As a provider I want to `Update` using stream atomically the value and current value of one or many sensors and/or actuators with its timestamp to Databroker.

Reviewer 2: * Why distinguishing between _value_ and _current value_? Imho, the value of a sensor could also be labelled as _current value_.
* Adding "efficiently" to emphasize the requirement to do this with least possible overhead
```suggestion
3. A provider shall be able to continuously and efficiently (e.g. via grpc stream) _**update**_ the current value of one or multiple sensors and/or actuators with its timestamp.
```

> 4. As a provider I want to `Subscribe` to actuator target values requests.

Reviewer 2: I also like the idea of having a "mixed document" where the reasoning of why requirements are that way is done "around" the respective requirement and the hard requirements are then clearly visible placed in the text (maybe put in some box or preceded by a well-recognizable bold requirements marker).

Anyway, we later - once we finished this more or less - should add unique ids to the requirements.

> 5. As a provider I want to `Set` once attributes values.

Reviewer 2: Yes, attribute values could be part of the signal config (vss.json) passed to the broker at startup.

Question is then: How to update databroker with new signals at runtime (e.g. in case of a "dynamic" update)? Easiest option would be to stop and restart the broker with the new signal config.

> 5. As a provider I want to `Set` once attributes values.

Reviewer 3: I agree that regular providers do not handle attribute values. If there is a requirement to change attributes during runtime, this might be an argument for this attribute actually being a sensor. 

We had a number of concerns with changing the VSS tree during runtime (adding/removing nodes etc.), so I would changes to attributes only through the signal config at the start (as proposed by @BjoernAtBosch )

> 6. As a provider I don’t need to but I would like to `Get` sensor values or current values of actuatros?.

Reviewer 2: I see _consumer_ and _provider_ as separate roles - but not as separate components/applications: A component can have one of those roles or both, i.e. being pure consumer or pure provider, or a combined "consumer provider".
From that point of perspective, this requirement should be removed.

> 6. As a provider I don’t need to but I would like to `Get` sensor values or current values of actuatros?.

Reviewer 3: The notion of defining different roles for consumers and providers while both perspectives can be implemented in the same component makes sense to me. 
I would however, still state what each roles requires to do to make explicit what the roles mean. 

So for the specific case, I think it makes sense for a provider get the current values at least for the sensors that it provides since it might need to know the indicated value in the databroker.

> 7. As a provider I don’t want to `Set` target values to Databroker.

Reviewer 3: Agreed, unless there is a hard reason to now allow something. In this case, I agree we do not explicitly exclude the provider from being able set target values.

> 7. As a provider I don’t want to `Set` target values to Databroker.

Author: Also agree, will remove negated requirements.

# Non-Functional Requirements

## Data availability/persistence according to lifecycle of Client, Databroker and Provider
1. The data broker either ...
   * Stores last set values during its own lifecycle,
   * ? stores values during the system's power cycle (i.e., "persists" values over own restarts, or
   * store values over system's power cycles.

2. How to "reset" values availability if its provider got inactive (without reseting the value)?
   * -> Client's job (e.g. using timestamp)?

>    * -> Broker's job (e.g. using timestamp + minimal update cycle)?

Reviewer 3: I do not have clear opinion, but am torn towards leaving the decision whether a value is still considered as available to the client. This might depend on the circumstances, the use case and the signal and it is therefore hard to make a general decision even per signal. 

However, it would of course be great if the broker could already decide whether the signal is considered as not available anymore, to relive the client from making this evaluation and avoid sending around the data and timestamps. 
What do you think about allowing the client to optionally add a minimal update cycle to the request and then letting the databroker decide per request whether the signal is returned? This would of course add processing load to the databroker.

3. Provider and client aliveness

>    * If there is no active client subscription should the provider stop sending values to Databroker?

Reviewer 3: I think it should still send values. There is still a high chance that a client is requesting single values through Get and without subscribing.

>    * If there is no active provider setting values while client subscription? Should Databroker or Client be aware of it?

Reviewer 3: Would be nice to be aware of whether there is an active provider.  But depending on the signal and time since the last update to the signal, I would still allow the consumer to get the data even if there is not an active provider in that moment.

## Wildcard support
* Should `Get` and `Subscribe` calls support Wildcard request?

> * Do we want it only for `GetMetadata`?

Reviewer 3: See discussion above. Maybe remove this questions here in favor of what we come up above.

Reference -> [Wildcard](./wildcard_matching.md)

## Registration of Datapoints

> Do we need a method for providers to register data points at runtime? **Implemented in old API?**:

Reviewer 3: I think we should not have this option. In the old API it had a number of shortcoming also in terms of security and potential denial of service and I would keep the signal tree as static as possible.

Its purpose would be:

> 1.	Publishing the availability of new data points during runtime

Reviewer 3: What kind of data point do you expect to show up during runtime which are not known at design time/configuration time of the databroker? 

To me there is a difference between signals which are currently not available or that will not be available at all. With the VSS tree I would express which signals can become available in that broker even if they might not be available at the moment.

Reviewer 2: You could think of a scenario, where you add new applications and providers via an app store. With that, new signals could become available during runtime. This could be the case if providing hardware is present but software is missing (during delivery of the vehicle). Or "higher value" signals (based on pure software) could be offered this way. User then can download by payment. 

We could handle this via updating the local broker config and then restarting the broker (loading the new config).

Reviewer 3: At least in the hardware example, I would expect that the tree already contains the signals that the providing hardware could provide since the hardware is then known at design time of the system and hardware. 

That was at least my assumption to differentiate between signals that are currently not available (hardware present but provider missing) and that will not be available at all. 

In general, to have the option to add (or remove?) signals during runtime seems to add more complexity and edge cases which is another reason why I like the approach of updating the local broker config more.

Reviewer 2: I disagree putting signal definitions into the config just because the providing hardware is present. I'd prefer to have only that signals in the config, that have a installed (and runnable) provider in the system. "Currently not available" means for me that the respective provider is currently not up and running (i.e. not yet started or temporary inactive due to a crash or update), or that some other component down the chain to the hardware is temporary not active.

2.	Claiming providership of those data points

> In a mature system some "central instance", e.g., the system integrator must be responsible to ensure that no two components can register/claim providership for any data point.

Reviewer 3: How would one ensure that there is no contention at design time? To me it sounds like the databroker should still manage and check such a "ownership". One way for a provider could be to open a stream which writes to the signal. The broker then would only allow a single stream at the same time with write access to a current value.

2. It shall be possible to determine the availability of the actual value of each data point separately on a certain instance of the data broker.
This represents the information if the provider of that data point is up and running on the system and already provided a value of that data point.

## Lifecycle of components
The proper function of the overall system of components "around" the data broker, i.e., applications, providers, and the broker itself, shall not depend on a certain order of starting the components. This means:
1.	Any clients of the data broker (applications, providers) shall not assume the availability of the data broker service when they startup.
2.	Any clients of the data broker (applications, providers) shall not assume the permanent availability of the data broker service during their runtime.
3.	Any applications/clients shall not assume the availability of a value for any data point at their startup.
4.	Any applications/clients shall not assume the permanent presence of a value for any data point during their runtime.

> Explanation: Any component of the system can come and go - components could stop working due to a crash (what should not but will happen) or because of an update (which is a regular use case). Furthermore, components could reside on different execution environments which need restarts at different points of time. This shall not result in stopping and restarting the overall system. Instead, each and every component shall react in an appropriate way on changing availability of its dependencies.

Reviewer 2: @lukasmittag: The reason is written in the explanation. You don't know in what order the overall collection of components is started. Also, it can happen that the broker is (temporary) not available - due to crash or update. Same is true for current signal values.
Regarding the state of signals/values:
1. A certain expected signal could be not know/available in a vehicle system, i.e. there is no respective provider installed and executable on the system (consequently, it shall not be part of the "broker config vss.json")
1. The client might have not access (rights) to it
   a. The vehicle manufacturer does not allow the client to access the signal
   b. The user ("driver") disabled access to the signal (like on smart phones: "Is this app allowed to access my camera?")
1. It might be known and accessible, but currently no value is given by a provider
1. It may have an "invalid" state, i.e. the provider is available, but maybe the physical sensor is out of order or has some temporary issues
1. The signal is known, accessible, currently provided, and has a valid value.

* The "failure" states 1 and 2(a) are "permanent". It makes no sense to install a client on the system if it needs _**mandatory**_ request to signals in those states. If the client just uses them _optionally_, it still can make sense.
* The states 3 + 4 are of temporary nature (hopefully) and consumers (and providers) need being able to proper handle these situations.
* The last state is the "ideal case" from the client's point of perspective. But the world isn't ideal ...

## Path requests
The data broker shall support at least those metadata elements as defined by the VSS rule set. Data points/nodes are (primarily) identified ("addressed") by their name/path which is a string.

> VSS arranges nodes in a tree structure, separating elements via a single dot ("."). This shall be supported but must not be a mandatory requirement.

Reviewer 2: @lukasmittag: Yes, I guess the wording is not correct. What's meant is, that the broker shall also support 
* "flat" signal structures (i.e. without any path separator)
* maybe the path separator (the ".") should be configurable.

  // user-facing error message should be localized and sent in the
  // [google.rpc.Status.details][google.rpc.Status.details] field, or localized by the client.
  string message = 2;

  // A list of messages that carry the error details.  There will be a
  // common set of message types for APIs to use.
  repeated google.protobuf.Any details = 3;
}
``` 
Field `details` of type `Any` will be a serialized message as `bytes` containing an internal Databroker [Error](https://github.com/eclipse-kuksa/kuksa-databroker/blob/main/proto/kuksa/val/v1/types.proto#L246):
```protobuf
message Error {
  uint32 code    = 1;
  string reason  = 2;
  string message = 3;
}
```

## Setting Values
1. Attributes: 
   * It shall not be possible to set attribute values, except once at startup time by its respective responsible provider.
2. Sensors: 
   * There shall be only one client able to set the current sensor value during each arbitrary span of time.
3. Actuators:
   * ? Actuator data points have a current and a target value. The current value represents the actual state of the actuator, whereas the target value represents a state desired by that client, who most recently set that target value. 

>    * Only one client shall be able to set the current actuator value during each arbitrary span of time. This client is the provider of the data point.

Reviewer 2: Imho, we should use the [existing terminology](https://github.com/eclipse-kuksa/kuksa-databroker/blob/main/doc/terminology.md) as linked at the beginning of the document, which defines _(VSS) consumers_ and _(VSS) providers_. A _client_ is a provider and/or a consumer.

>    * Multiple client may be able to set the target value of an actuator.

Reviewer 2: We should have a general "requirement", that each signal can have only one provider - at least at a time. Regardless if it are sensors or actuators,
* current values should be set/updated by a single instance (at a time), only,
* only a single instance (at a time) shall react on actuation requests.

* **Provider**<br>
  _A provider is providing a signal (sensor, attribute or actuator) to the VSS tree._<br>
  _A provider can also use signals as any other user._

* **User**<br>
  _A user (or client) is using the signals in the VSS tree (without providing any of them itself)._

where the VSS and VISS* specifications only specify the **User** part.

When designing the databroker API, the method kuksa.val uses for providing signals was investigated. In short, kuksa-val-server takes the approach of trying to shoehorn the need of signal providers into the existing VISSv2 protocol. This is problematic for several reasons:

* By reusing, **but changing the meaning** of the terminology used in VSS, there is a constant dissonance between the terms used. This is a recipe for confusion.
* By deviating from the standard in _this particular way_, a standards compliant VISSv2 client cannot use it in any meaningful way.
* It makes it harder to actually provide a standards compliant VISSv2 in the future .
* By using the same methods for both signal providers _and_ users of signals it's harder (or impossible) to customize them for their different requirements.

> With this in mind, databroker chose to make a clear distinction between signal providers and signal users. It doesn't use this terminology though. It does this by splitting the interface into two separate services, which are customized for their different requirements / use cases. It doesn't need to be implemented in this way in order to achieve the same design goal, though.

Author: I think @argerus is the original author of this section, maybe he can do some rephrasing :)

## Enable "easy to use" user facing API

This is meant to illustrate what type of user APIs that can be created depending on what the provider API looks like (assuming we have one).

Use case:

The user wants to lock a door and know when it's done / whether it worked.

**The kuksa.val.v1 or "key-value store" way.**

Something conceptually like this:
1. User calls `set(Vehicle.Door.Locked, field=TARGET_VALUE, true)`
2. User calls `subscribe(Vehicle.Door.Locked, field=VALUE)`
3. Provider (subscribing to TARGET_VALUE) receives the request and starts actuating, providing VALUE when it changes.
4. User is notified when VALUE turns to true, and concludes that the door has now been locked.

But what happens if the door fails to lock, e.g. the door is not close or the actuator is broken?
* What should the user subscribe to for this information?

> * And how long should it wait before concluding that it failed?

Reviewer 2: The VSS defines an explicit defect sensor signal for some actuators (like the front beams), i.e. `Vehicle.Body.Lights.Beam.Low.IsDefect` of boolean type. But that's not generally the case. 

We could discuss introducing a general defect failure state in addition to the four failure states proposed above. Setting a target value to an actuator in defect state could then be rejected by the broker/provider with a proper error.

But that wouldn't help in situations where the requested target value cannot be "achieved" for other reasons, e.g. seat or window movement is stopped due to a blockage; or a remotely requested seat movement is rejected because the vehicle is currently being driven. Currently, one could just recognize that the seat/window movement is stopped (before reaching the target) or not happening at all via the updates of the current value. (For other actuators, VSS explicitly distinguishes between current and target values). 

I guess we should not try to fix all the shortcomings of the VSS spec ...

BTW: Door's lock and open states are not necessarily related: You could lock an open door and if you close it, you can't reopen it (because of the lock). The actual behaviour will be vehicle specific.

a consumer would only need it 1 time per second. This would introduce unnecessary processing
requirements on the consumer (and provider).

Currently there is no way for databroker to know how often a provider should provide updates.
There is also no way for clients to instruct databroker of what rate they want.
Sensor data is just sent at the rate it is received and providers are just sending sensor data at the rate
they themselves decide.

If a consumer can communicate this wish, there are several options for improvement.

Improvements:
* Reduction in load for consumers by adapting the update rate based on their preferences.
* Reduction in load for for providers by propagating needed update rate.
* Reduction in load for databroker by disabling unneeded providers.

What's needed:
* Introduce a way for clients to tell databroker of their preferred rate of updates.
* Introduce a way for databroker to tell providers of highest needed frequency of sensor
  data to which they can then adapt.
  [probably needs] open stream `databroker` -> `provider`

Other considerations:

Setting the desired rate of update would only make sense for sensors of type CONTINUOUS.

> Sensors of type ON_CHANGE would always provide updates when the value changes.

Reviewer: An interesting longterm topic for ON_CHANGE could be to discuss if we need a possibility to specify a threshold for what is considered as a changed value. Taking tire pressure as example, most likely every reading will be slightly different, but if value change from 2.305 to 2.307 it does not really matter. Setting a threshold of for example 0.2 could be useful if you want to know about significant changes as fast as possible.
